An algorithm is a procedure for solving a problem. The discussion about AI often wrongly points to smart algorithms that could even "beat" human intelligence. Nothing could be further from the truth: algorithms are extremely stupid[6][7][8]: they do exactly what is asked of them (if not, that would indicate strong AI). But they do so extremely quickly, which suggests the illusion of being "smart". Algorithms are strong at quickly processing large amounts of data, as evidenced by pattern recognition by robots (such as diagnosing diseases, self-driving cars, chess computers, etc.). The inventor of such an algorithm may be smart, but he is inevitably limited by the fact that he cannot guarantee that his algorithm is a solution to his problem if the context of the problem cannot be clearly defined. The frame of reference of such an algorithm is limited (as in the case of chess, for example). In real life, however, people have to deal with a multitude of partly overlapping contexts within a broad frame of reference in which the problem cannot be clearly defined. The power of human intelligence is that people can quickly switch contexts, for example during a partial solution to a problem. This is also the basis for paradigm shifts in problem solving.

People and animals mainly recognize patterns unconsciously, unless the pattern deviates from what we expect. This unconscious method points to the execution of an algorithm in the neural network. In fact, all actions that someone does automatically, without thinking about it, are carried out by algorithms in the central nervous system. Consciousness only becomes active when the algorithm stagnates due to an unexpected event.

Some algorithms can learn, that is, they can add new patterns that they do not yet know to their database. There is a danger that such a new pattern will reinforce a prejudice. Freeing a database from bias is extremely difficult and requires a lot of human intelligence. As a result, all kinds of algorithms regularly fail.